Improved the Wilks documentation (#2712)
openturns/openturns: python/doc/theory/data_analysis/quantile_estimation_wilks.rst

.. _quantile_estimation_wilks:

Estimation of a quantile upper bound by Wilks' method
-----------------------------------------------------

> We consider a random variable :math:`X` of dimension 1 and its unknown quantile :math:`x_{\alpha}` of level :math:`\alpha \in [0, 1]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We consider a random variable :math:`X` of dimension 1 and the unknown :math:`x_{\alpha}` level quantile of its distribution (:math:`\alpha \in [0, 1]`).
```

Author: ok

We seek to evaluate an upper bound of :math:`x_{\alpha}` with a confidence greater or equal to :math:`\beta`, using a given order statistics.

> Let :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` be some independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) variables according to :math:`X`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` be independent copies of :math:`X`.
```

Author: great!

Let :math:`X_{(k)}` be the :math:`k` -th order statistics of :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` which means that
:math:`X_{(k)}` is the :math:`k` -th maximum of :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` for :math:`1 \leq k \leq \sampleSize`. For
example, :math:`X_{(1)} = \min (X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` is the minimum
and :math:`X_{(\sampleSize)} = \max (X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` is the maximum. We have:

.. math::

    X_{(1)} \leq X_{(2)} \leq \dots \leq X_{(\sampleSize)}

Smallest rank for an upper bound to the quantile
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let :math:`(x_1, \dots, x_\sampleSize)` be an i.i.d. sample of size :math:`\sampleSize` of
the random variable :math:`X`.
Given a quantile level :math:`\alpha \in [0,1]`, a confidence level

> :math:`\beta \in [0,1]`, and a sample size :math:`\sampleSize`, we seek for the smallest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:math:`\beta \in [0,1]`, and a sample size :math:`\sampleSize`, we seek the smallest
```

Author: yes

rank :math:`k \in \llbracket 1, \sampleSize \rrbracket` such that:

.. math::
    :label: EqOrderStat

    \Prob{x_{\alpha} \leq X_{(k)}} \geq \beta

The probability density and cumulative distribution functions of the order
statistics :math:`X_{(k)}` are:

.. math::
    :label: DistOrderStat

    F_{X_{(k)}}(x) & = \sum_{i=k}^{\sampleSize} \binom{\sampleSize}{i}\left(F(x)
    \right)^i \left(1-F(x)
    \right)^{\sampleSize-i} \\
    p_{X_{(k)}}(x) & = (\sampleSize-k+1)\binom{\sampleSize}{k-1}\left(F(x)\right)^{k-1}
    \left(1-F(x)
    \right)^{\sampleSize-k} p(x)

We notice that :math:`F_{X_{(k)}}(x) = \overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k-1)` where
:math:`F_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}` is the cumulated
distribution function of the Binomial distribution :math:`\cB(\sampleSize,F(x))` and
:math:`\overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k) = 1 - F_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k)` is the
complementary cumulated distribution fonction (also named survival function in dimension
1).
Therefore:

.. math::

    F_{X_{(k)}}(x_{\alpha}) = \sum_{i=k}^{\sampleSize} \binom{\sampleSize}{i} \alpha^i (1-\alpha)^{\sampleSize-i}
    = \overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,\alpha)}(k-1)

> and the equation :eq:`EqOrderStat` implies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and equation :eq:`EqOrderStat` implies:
```

Author: yes

.. _quantile_estimation_wilks:

Estimation of a quantile upper bound by Wilks' method
-----------------------------------------------------

> We consider a random variable :math:`X` of dimension 1 and its unknown quantile :math:`x_{\alpha}` of order :math:`\alpha`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We consider a random variable :math:`X` of dimension 1 and its unknown quantile :math:`x_{\alpha}` of level :math:`\alpha \in [0, 1]`.
```

We seek to evaluate an upper bound of :math:`x_{\alpha}` with a confidence greater or equal to :math:`\beta`, using a given order statistics.

> Let :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` be some independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) variables according to :math:`X`.
> 
> Let :math:`X_{(k)}` be the :math:`k` -th order statistics of :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` which means that

Reviewer 2: There is an unnecessary line break here:
```suggestion
Let :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` be some independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) variables according to :math:`X`.
Let :math:`X_{(k)}` be the :math:`k` -th order statistics of :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` which means that
```

:math:`X_{(k)}` is the :math:`k` -th maximum of :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` for :math:`1 \leq k \leq \sampleSize`. For
example, :math:`X_{(1)} = \min (X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` is the minimum
and :math:`X_{(\sampleSize)} = \max (X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` is the maximum. We have:

.. math::

    X_{(1)} \leq X_{(2)} \leq \dots \leq X_{(\sampleSize)}

Smallest rank for an upper bound to the quantile
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let :math:`(x_1, \dots, x_\sampleSize)` be an i.i.d. sample of size :math:`\sampleSize` of
the random variable :math:`X`.
Given a quantile level :math:`\alpha \in [0,1]`, a confidence level
:math:`\beta \in [0,1]`, and a sample size :math:`\sampleSize`, we seek for the smallest
rank :math:`k \in \llbracket 1, \sampleSize \rrbracket` such that:

.. math::
    :label: EqOrderStat

    \Prob{x_{\alpha} \leq X_{(k)}} \geq \beta

> The order statistics :math:`X_{(k)}` follows the distribution which probability density
> function and cumulative distribution function
> are:

Reviewer 2: The order of the statements is reversed. It is easier to read it as follows in my opinion:
```suggestion
The probability density and cumulative distribution functions of the order 
statistics :math:`X_{(k)}` are:
```

    \right)^i \left(1-F(x)
    \right)^{\sampleSize-i} \\
    p_{X_{(k)}}(x) & = (\sampleSize-k+1)\binom{\sampleSize}{k-1}\left(F(x)\right)^{k-1}
    \left(1-F(x)
    \right)^{\sampleSize-k} p(x)

We notice that :math:`F_{X_{(k)}}(x) = \overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k-1)` where
:math:`F_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}` is the cumulated
distribution function of the Binomial distribution :math:`\cB(\sampleSize,F(x))` and
:math:`\overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k) = 1 - F_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k)` is the
complementary cumulated distribution fonction (also named survival function in dimension
1).
Therefore:

.. math::

    F_{X_{(k)}}(x_{\alpha}) = \sum_{i=k}^{\sampleSize} \binom{\sampleSize}{i} \alpha^i (1-\alpha)^{\sampleSize-i}
    = \overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,\alpha)}(k-1)

and the equation :eq:`EqOrderStat` implies:

.. math::
    :label: EqOrderStat2

    1-F_{X_{(k)}}(x_{\alpha})\geq \beta

This implies:

.. math::

    F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k-1)\geq \beta

The smallest rank :math:`k_{sol}` such that the previous equation is satisfied is:

.. math::

    k_{sol} & = \min \{ k \in \llbracket 1, n \rrbracket \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k-1)\geq \beta \}\\

>             & = 1 +  \min \{ k \in \llbracket 1, n\rrbracket] \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k)\geq \beta \}

Reviewer 2: There is an extra square bracket here:
```suggestion
            & = 1 +  \min \{ k \in \llbracket 1, n\rrbracket \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k)\geq \beta \}
```

.. _quantile_estimation_wilks:

Estimation of a quantile upper bound by Wilks' method
-----------------------------------------------------

We consider a random variable :math:`X` of dimension 1 and its unknown quantile :math:`x_{\alpha}` of order :math:`\alpha`.

> We seek to evaluate an upper bound of :math:`x_{\alpha}` with a confidence greater than :math:`\beta`, using a given order statistics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We seek to evaluate an upper bound of :math:`x_{\alpha}` with a confidence greater or equal to :math:`\beta`, using a given order statistics.
```

Author: yes

We denote by :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` some independent and identically distributed variables according to :math:`X`.

> 
> We denote by :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` some independent and identically distributed variables according to :math:`X`.

Reviewer 2: This is duplicated.
```suggestion
```

Author: I do not agree because we need to introduce $(X_1, \dots, X_n)$ in order to define the order statistics just after:
 Let $X_{(k)}$ be the :k-th order statistics of $(X_1, \dots, X_n)$

Let :math:`X_{(k)}` be the :math:`k` -th order statistics of :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` which means that
:math:`X_{(k)}` is the :math:`k` -th maximum of :math:`(X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` for :math:`1 \leq k \leq \sampleSize`. For
example, :math:`X_{(1)} = \min (X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` is the minimum
and :math:`X_{(\sampleSize)} = \max (X_1, \dots, X_\sampleSize)` is the maximum. We have:

.. math::

    X_{(1)} \leq X_{(2)} \leq \dots \leq X_{(\sampleSize)}

Estimation of the order statistics that will provide an upper bound to :math:`x_{\alpha}`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We assume that we have a sample of size :math:`\sampleSize` of :math:`X`, denoted by :math:`(x_1, \dots, x_\sampleSize)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let :math:`(x_1, \dots, x_\sampleSize)` be an i.i.d. sample of size :math:`\sampleSize` of the random variable :math:`X`.
```

Author: yes

> 

Reviewer 2: The line break is unnecessary here.
```suggestion
```

Author: ok

> Given :math:`\alpha`, :math:`\beta`, and :math:`\sampleSize`, we seek for the smallest :math:`k` such that:

Author: yes except for the k for which I used the interval notation for integers.

.. math::
    :label: EqOrderStat

>     \Prob{X_{(k)} \geq x_{\alpha}} \geq \beta

Reviewer 2: I believe that exchanging the expressions makes it clearer that $X_{(k)}$ is an _upper_ bound of the quantile.
```suggestion
    \Prob{x_{\alpha} \leq X_{(k)}} \geq \beta
```

Author: yes

> The order statistics :math:`X_{(k)}` follows the distribution which probability density function and cumulated distribution function

Reviewer 2: The word is "cumulative" (see [Cumulative_distribution_function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cumulative_distribution_function)):
```suggestion
The order statistics :math:`X_{(k)}` follows the distribution which probability density function and cumulative distribution function
```

Author: yes

> are defined by:

Reviewer 2: This is not a definition, this is a theorem.
```suggestion
are:
```

Author: yes

.. math::
    :label: DistOrderStat

>     F_{X_{(k)}}(x) & = \sum_{i=k}^{\sampleSize} \binom{\sampleSize}{i}\left[F(x)\right]^i \left[1-F(x)
>     \right]^{\sampleSize-i} \\
>     p_{X_{(k)}}(x) & = (\sampleSize-k+1)\binom{\sampleSize}{k-1}\left[F(x)\right]^{k-1} \left[1-F(x)
>     \right]^{\sampleSize-k} p(x)

Reviewer 2: Square brackets are rarely used in mathematics (e.g. the integer part), except with a special meaning. Here, there is no reason to do so.
```suggestion
    F_{X_{(k)}}(x) & = \sum_{i=k}^{\sampleSize} \binom{\sampleSize}{i} \left(F(x)\right)^i \left(1-F(x)
    \right)^{\sampleSize-i} \\
    p_{X_{(k)}}(x) & = (\sampleSize-k+1) \binom{\sampleSize}{k-1} \left(F(x)\right)^{k-1} \left(1-F(x)
    \right)^{\sampleSize-k} p(x)
```

Author: ok

> We notice that :math:`F_{X_{(k)}}(x) = \overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k-1)` where :math:`F_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}` is the cumulated
> distribution function of the Binomial distribution :math:`\cB(\sampleSize,F(x))`.

Reviewer 2: The notation $\overline{F}$ should be introduced too.
```suggestion
We notice that :math:`F_{X_{(k)}}(x) = \overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k - 1)` where :math:`F_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}` is the cumulated
distribution function of the Binomial distribution :math:`\cB(\sampleSize,F(x))`
and :math:`\overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k) = 1 - F_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k)` is the complementary cumulated distribution fonction (also named survival function in dimension 1).
```

Author: yes

> 

Reviewer 2: The line break is unnecessary here.
```suggestion
```

> Then, we have:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore:
```

Author: yes

.. math::

>     F_{X_{(k)}}(x_{\alpha}) = \sum_{i=k}^{\sampleSize} \binom{\sampleSize}{i} \alpha^i (1-\alpha)^{\sampleSize-i

Reviewer 3: there is a missing } at the end:
(1-\alpha)^{\sampleSize-i}

    = \overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,\alpha)}(k-1)

> and relation :eq:`EqOrderStat` can be written as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the equation :eq:`EqOrderStat` implies:
```

Author: yes

.. math::
    :label: EqOrderStat2

>     1-F_{X_{(k)}}(x_{\alpha})\geq \beta \\
>     F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k-1)\geq \beta

Reviewer 2: These are two different equation, where the second is implied by the first one.
```suggestion
    1 - F_{X_{(k)}}(x_{\alpha}) \geq \beta

This implies:

.. math::
    F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k - 1) \geq \beta
```

Author: ok

> The smallest order :math:`k_{sol}` is defined by:

Author: yes

.. math::

>     k_{sol} & = \min \{ k \in [1, n] \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k-1)\geq \beta \}\\
>             & = 1 +  \min \{ k \in [1, n] \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k)\geq \beta \}

Reviewer 2: This is not the continuous interval $[1, n]$ that we are considering here, but the discrete set of integers $\{1, ..., n\}$.
```suggestion
    k_{sol} & = \min \{ k \in \{1, ..., n\} \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k - 1)\geq \beta \}\\
            & = 1 +  \min \{ k \in \{1, ..., n\} \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k)\geq \beta \}
```

Author: I re-introduced the brackets for integers , introducing the package stmaryrd in the math_notations.sty file.

>             & = 1 +  \min \{ k \in \llbracket 1, n \rrbracket \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k)\geq \beta \}

Reviewer 3: it doesnt like the llbracket/rrbracket, goes fine with [ ]

Author: But I introduced the package stmaryd in the file math_notations.sty! I retry because I guess I had not pushed the new version of the math_notations.sty file....

An upper bound of  :math:`x_{\alpha}` is estimated by the value of :math:`X_{(k_{sol})}`  on the sample
:math:`(x_1, \dots, x_\sampleSize)`.

> Estimation of the smallest sample size that ensures that a given order statistics will provide an upper bound
> to :math:`x_{\alpha}`
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/openturns/openturns/assets/31351465/273951d9-22e1-4758-afe6-f7547c28757f)
```suggestion
Minimum sample size for an upper bound of the quantile
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Author: yes

> Given :math:`\alpha`, :math:`\beta`, and :math:`k`, we seek for the smallest sample size :math:`\sampleSize`
> that verifies :eq:`EqOrderStat`. This time, :eq:`EqOrderStat2` is solved wrt :math:`\sampleSize`.

Reviewer 2: The second resolution is on k, not n.
```suggestion
Given :math:`\alpha`, :math:`\beta`, and :math:`k`, we seek for the smallest sample size :math:`\sampleSize`
such that the equation :eq:`EqOrderStat` is satisfied. Then the :eq:`EqOrderStat2` is solved with respect to the rank :math:`k`.
```

Author: No! We seek for the sample size in that cntext. We haved fixed the order statistics k.

> 
> Once the smallest size :math:`\sampleSize`  has been estimated, a sample of size :math:`\sampleSize` can be
> generated from
> :math:`X` and an upper bound of :math:`x_{\alpha}` is estimated by the value of the value of
> :math:`X_{(\sampleSize-i)}` on the sample
> :math:`(x_1, \dots, x_\sampleSize)`.

Reviewer 2: The observation of $X_{(n - i)}$ on the sample $(x_1, \dots, x_n)$ is ... $x_{(n - i)}$:
```suggestion

Once the smallest size :math:`\sampleSize`  has been estimated, a sample of size :math:`\sampleSize` can be
generated from
:math:`X` and an upper bound of :math:`x_{\alpha}` is estimated using :math:`x_{(\sampleSize - i)}`, i.e. the 
:math:`\sampleSize - i`-th observation in the ordered sample :math:`(x_{(1)}, \dots, x_{(\sampleSize)})`.
```

Author: yes

:math:`\overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k) = 1 - F_{(\sampleSize,F(x))}(k)` is the
complementary cumulated distribution fonction (also named survival function in dimension
1).
Therefore:

.. math::

    F_{X_{(k)}}(x_{\alpha}) = \sum_{i=k}^{\sampleSize} \binom{\sampleSize}{i} \alpha^i (1-\alpha)^{\sampleSize-i}
    = \overline{F}_{(\sampleSize,\alpha)}(k-1)

and the equation :eq:`EqOrderStat` implies:

.. math::
    :label: EqOrderStat2

    1-F_{X_{(k)}}(x_{\alpha})\geq \beta

This implies:

.. math::

    F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k-1)\geq \beta

The smallest rank :math:`k_{sol}` such that the previous equation is satisfied is:

.. math::

    k_{sol} & = \min \{ k \in \llbracket 1, n \rrbracket \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k-1)\geq \beta \}\\
            & = 1 +  \min \{ k \in \llbracket 1, n\rrbracket] \, | \, F_{\sampleSize, \alpha}(k)\geq \beta \}

An upper bound of  :math:`x_{\alpha}` is estimated by the value of :math:`X_{(k_{sol})}`  on the sample
:math:`(x_1, \dots, x_\sampleSize)`.

Minimum sample size for an upper bound to the quantile
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Given :math:`\alpha`, :math:`\beta`, and :math:`k`, we seek for the smallest sample size :math:`\sampleSize`
> such that the equation :eq:`EqOrderStat` is satisfied. Then the :eq:`EqOrderStat2` is solved with respect to the rank :math:`\sampleSize`.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I did not understand the meaning of the sentence and was confused by the fact that the text mentions two different equations. Let me please rephrase this.
```suggestion
Given :math:`\alpha`, :math:`\beta`, and :math:`k`, we seek for the smallest sample size :math:`\sampleSize`
such that the equation :eq:`EqOrderStat` is satisfied. In order to do so, we solve the equation :eq:`EqOrderStat2` with respect to the sample size :math:`\sampleSize`.
```

Author: ok!
